---
title: Gibbon
layout: post
excerpt: |-
  Gibbon is a monkey patch for RSpec to allow you to use
  <a href="http://wiki.github.com/aslakhellesoy/cucumber/given-when-then">Given/When/Then</a>
  templates in your RSpec/Webrat integration tests. It's so simple it doesn't
  even need to be distributed as a library.

---

At [work][hr], I've recently been downplaying the importance of [Gibbon][g]
being distributed as a library, since I don't really think it's the code
that's important&hellip; the technique is where it's at. As such, I'm not
going to give the [hack][g] itself or its [configuration][c] any stage time in
order to jump in and talk about how to use it and what its limitations are.

## Monkeying Around

By and large, Gibbon's syntax apes [Cucumber][ck]'s take on [Given/When/Then
Templates][gwt].

There are, however, some gotcha's and limitations and that's what I'd like to
focus on. Let's start off with an example:

{% highlight ruby %}
  Feature "A Tomatoist does a pomodoro" do
    Story <<-eos
    In order to perform a focused unit of work
    As a Tomatoist
    I want to start a pomodoro
    eos

    Scenario "Starting a pomodoro" do
      When "I go to the home page" do
        executes { visit '/' }

        Then "I should be sent to a new session" do
          current_url.should =~ /\/\w{3,}/
        end

        And "I should see an unstarted timer" do
          response.should have_tag('#timer .countdown_row','00:00')
        end

        And "I should see a pomdoro button" do
          response.should have_tag('input[type=submit][value=?]','Pomdoro')
        end

        When "I click the pomodoro button" do
          executes do
            @session_url = current_url
            click_button 'Pomodoro'
          end

          Then "I should be on my session's page" do
            current_url.should == @session_url
          end

          And "my timers should have been initialized" do
            response.should have_tag('#timer .countdown_row','25:00')
          end

          And "my timer history should show the current pomdoro" do
            response.should have_tag('#history ul li', /Pomodoro/, 1)
          end

          And "the pomodoro button should be highlighted" do
            response.should have_tag('form.current input[type=submit][value=?]','Pomdoro')
          end
        end
      end
    end
  end
{% endhighlight %}

And here's what the output of that feature looks like using RSpec's built in
`nested` formatter:

    A Tomatoist does a pomodoro
      In order to perform a focused unit of work
      As a Tomatoist
      I want to start a pomodoro

      Scenario: Starting a pomodoro
        When I go to the home page
          Then I should be sent to a new session
          And I should see an unstarted timer
          And I should see a pomdoro button
          When I click the pomodoro button
            Then I should be on my session's page
            And my timers should have been initialized
            And my timer history should show the current pomdoro
            And the pomodoro button should be highlighted

## Flinging Poo

There are a couple of things you should note about the syntax straight off:

1. It's verbose.
1. It relies heavily on nesting (sometimes in ways that feel awkward).

It's also noteworthy that the primary means of interrogating the response is
through either the `have_tag` matchers or using something like `contain` to
look for text. This is not necessarily a bad thing, but it can lead quickly to
close coupling unless you are constantly vigilant. I'm still mulling this
aspect over, but as it stands, I haven't thought of a better way to handle it.

## Monkey wrenches

I've talked some to [Tim Pope][tp] about Gibbon, since he's a big fan of
Cucumber driven development. His criticism, in a nutshell, is that the English
text is not executable. He asserts that Cucumber keeps you honest by actually
mapping the text to executable code. This is definitely valid; I frequently
make the same argument about comments: "they're lies waiting to happen". It's
only a matter of time 'til they become stale and the code itself is more
recent.  I would argue though, that Cucumber only separates you from that same
fate by virtue of the author's diligence.

Tackling the problem of example descriptions diverging from implementation from
the opposite direction is [Jim Weirich][jw]'s recent entry into this field,
[Given][gv]. Given eshew's explanatory text altogether, preferring to let the
code speak for itself. Now we're talking! Combine that with something like
[Stories][st]' ability to convert code to plain English for output and you'd
have a really nice offering. What this solution still lacks though is the
facility of RSpec's matchers, as Given is built on top of Test::Unit (as is
Stories).

## Monkey Gone to Heaven

For now, I'll be sticking with Gibbon, since it provides me access to RSpec's
matchers, is crazy simple and gives me pretty much everything I require:

* Expressing business value using Given/When/Then templates
* English language output for deliverables
* Access to RSpec's matchers

I'd love to hear from you in the comments about what your experience is with
integration testing in general and how you're scratching that itch these days.

[hr]: http://www.hashrocket.com/
[g]: http://gist.github.com/206969
[c]: http://gist.github.com/190739
[ck]: http://cukes.info
[gwt]: http://wiki.github.com/aslakhellesoy/cucumber/given-when-then
[tp]: http://www.tpope.net/
[jw]: http://onestepback.org/
[gv]: http://github.com/jimweirich/Given
[st]: http://blog.citrusbyte.com/2009/05/20/stories/
